## Homework #03

#### Non-Integer Data     

1. Perform the following conversions using a 12-bit fixed point representation with 6 bits to the right of the binary point.  Use sign magnitude representation for the whole number part of the value.
   1. 0011 0101 1100
   1. -15.578125 from base 10 to fixed point.

1. Convert the base 10 value 9.5859375 into the fixed point representation from the previous question using each of the following rounding modes:
   1. Round up
   2. Round down
   3. Round to nearest - ties to even.  For binary numbers, rounding to even ensures that the LSb is 0.

1. Perform the following conversions using the 14-bit floating point system from the class slides.  Be sure to remember to take into account the implied 1 (from the _normalized form_) that is not included in the 14 bits.
   1. 1 01100 0110 1000
   1. 287.625

1. Using our 14-bit floating point system:
   1. What is the 14-bit binary representation of the largest positive number that can be represented?
   1. What is its base 10 value?

1. The examples of our floating point system above and those from class were all based on the mantissa being in _normalized form_.  Thus, we could always assume that there is a 1 to the left of the binary point. This was efficient because that bit then did not need to be stored in the mantissa, saving space.  Well It turns out that this also causes some problems that need to be dealt with.  The next few questions explore these problems and their resolution.

   1. It turns out that if the implied 1 is included, it is not possible to represent the (somewhat important) value zero.  Explain why this is not possible.

   1. To make it possible to represent zero, the convention is adopted that if the exponent bits are all 0 (i.e. 00000) then the implied 1 is omitted (i.e. it becomes an implied 0 instead).  This is called _denormalized form_ because there is now an assumed 0 (not a 1) to the left of the binary point.
      1. Give the 14-bit binary representation for zero.
      1. Give the 14-bit binary representation of the smallest positive number that can be represented in _normalized form_ (i.e. non-zero exponent and implied 1).
      1. Give the 14-bit binary value of the smallest positive number that can be represented in our system including _denormalized form_ (i.e. all zero exponent and an implied 0).
      1. So denormalized form allows us to represent 0, that's kind of a big deal.  What is another advantage of allowing denormalized forms? Hint: Consider the two previous questions.

#### Stored Programs and Micro-Instructions

NOTE: Not really questions on Stored Programs and Micro-Instructions. Rather these questions are on the carry over material that we didn't get to until Friday.

1. Give a hexadecimal EBCDIC encoding of the string "Hello!".

1. Translate the following string of hexadecimal bytes into text using the ASCII code:  0x 43 6f 6d 70 75 74 65 72 21

1. Consider the following UTF-8 Encoded character: `0xE1 82 80`
   1. What bit string is represented by the above hex value?
   1. What is the 21 bit unicode code-point for the encoded character? This can be done based on the table given in the slides.
   1. To what character does that code-point translate? You'll need to do some research to find a Unicode table on-line and find the character with the code-point you found.

1. Use the [Emojipedia](https://emojipedia.org/) and search for your favorite Emoji.
   1. What is the official name of your favorite emoji?
   1. What is the code point (in Hexadecimal) for your favorite emoji?
   1. Give the UTF-8 encoding of your favorite emoji.

1. Read about the [Patriot Missile Failure](http://www-users.math.umn.edu/~arnold//disasters/patriot.html). Explain briefly in your own words how this failure is related to abstraction.
